README.md, before:

# Retro ADS-B Radar ✈

Aircraft radar display built with Python and Pygame. Visualises real-time aircraft positions and metadata from a tar1090 server, with a retro interface.

## Features
- Real-time radar visualisation of aircraft within a configurable radius
- Military aircraft detection with configurable hex code prefixes and blinking effect
- Configurable font sizes and display settings
- Tabular display of aircraft data (callsign, altitude, speed, distance, track)
- Live ATC audio streaming from a specified URL
- Retro colour palette
- Terminus TTF fonts for an authentic look
- Default configuration is compatible with the [Hagibis Mini PC USB-C Hub](https://hagibis.com/products-p00288p1.html)

![Retro ADS-B Radar Screenshot](images/screenshot.png)

![Retro ADS-B Radar Running on Hagibis Mini PC USB-C Hub](images/hagibis_display.jpg)

## Quick Start

### Hardware Setup
- Connect your ADS-B USB dongle (e.g. RTL-SDR) to a Raspberry Pi or similar single-board computer.
- Attach a suitable 1090 MHz antenna to the dongle.
- Ensure the dongle is running software that provides ADS-B data in JSON format, such as [tar1090](https://github.com/wiedehopf/tar1090).
- Connect your Raspberry Pi to your display, such as the Hagibis Mini PC USB-C Hub, with an HDMI cable.

### Software Setup
Clone the repository:
  ```
  git clone https://github.com/nicespoon/retro-adsb-radar.git
  cd retro-adsb-radar
  ```
Create and activate a virtual environment:
```
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
```

Install dependencies:
  ```
  pip install -r requirements.txt
  ```
Configure the application:
  - Copy `config.ini.example` to `config.ini`.
  - Edit `config.ini` to set the `TAR1090URL` to your tar1090 data source URL (default: `http://localhost/tar1090/data/aircraft.json`).
  - Adjust location and display settings as needed.

### Run the Radar UI
```bash
python3 main.py
```

To quit, press `Q` or `ESC` in the radar window.

## Configuration
The application is configured via `config.ini`. Copy `config.ini.example` to `config.ini` and adjust as needed:

```ini
[General]
FETCH_INTERVAL = 10                # Data fetch interval (seconds)
MIL_PREFIX_LIST = 7CF              # Comma-separated list of military aircraft hex prefixes (e.g. 7CF,AE,43C)
TAR1090_URL = http://localhost/tar1090/data/aircraft.json  # tar1090 data source URL
BLINK_MILITARY = true              # Toggle blinking effect for military aircraft (true/false)

[Audio]
ATC_STREAM_URL =                   # URL of live ATC audio stream (leave blank to disable)
AUTO_START = false                 # Start ATC stream automatically (true/false)

[Location]
LAT = -31.9522                     # Radar centre latitude
LON = 115.8614                     # Radar centre longitude
AREA_NAME = PERTH                  # Displayed area name
RADIUS_NM = 60                     # Radar range (nautical miles)

[Display]
SCREEN_WIDTH = 960                 # Window width (pixels)
SCREEN_HEIGHT = 640                # Window height (pixels)
FPS = 6                            # Frames per second
MAX_TABLE_ROWS = 10                # Maximum number of aircraft to show in the table
FONT_PATH = fonts/TerminusTTF-4.49.3.ttf  # Path to TTF font
BACKGROUND_PATH =                  # Path to background image (leave blank for black background)
TRAIL_MIN_LENGTH = 8               # Minimum length of aircraft trail
TRAIL_MAX_LENGTH = 25              # Maximum length of aircraft trail
TRAIL_MAX_SPEED = 500              # Speed (knots) at which trail reaches maximum length
HEADER_FONT_SIZE = 32              # Font size for the header text
RADAR_FONT_SIZE = 22               # Font size for radar labels and callsigns
TABLE_FONT_SIZE = 22               # Font size for the data table
INSTRUCTION_FONT_SIZE = 12         # Font size for instruction text
```

## ATC Audio Streaming
This project can stream live Air Traffic Control (ATC) audio from an online or local source.

1.  Open your `config.ini` file.
2.  Add the `[Audio]` section (or edit it if it exists).
3.  Paste your live ATC audio stream URL into the `ATC_STREAM_URL` field.

To toggle audio, press `A` in the radar window.

## Pygame SDL Dependency Check and Troubleshooting

Pygame relies on several SDL subsystems, including:

- Video subsystem (`libsdl2`)
- Font rendering (`libsdl2-ttf`)
- Image loading (`libsdl2-image`)

The availability of these modules is checked at startup. If dependencies are installed on your system, the output will be:

```
Checking Pygame module support...
✅ Video: Supported
✅ Font: Supported
✅ Image: Supported
```

If modules are missing, the output will look like this:

```
Checking Pygame module support...
❌ Video: Not available - install libsdl2-2.0-0
❌ Font: Not available - install libsdl2-ttf-2.0-0
❌ Image: Not available - install libsdl2-image-2.0-0
```

### How to Fix Missing Dependencies

If you see errors indicating missing dependencies, you can install the required system packages using the following command:

```
sudo apt update
sudo apt install libsdl2-2.0-0 libsdl2-ttf-2.0-0 libsdl2-image-2.0-0
```

## License
- The project code is licensed under the MIT License (see `LICENSE`).
- Fonts used in this project are licensed under the SIL Open Font License Version 1.1. See font license files in the `fonts/` directory for details.

Commit message:

Edited README, updated default font sizes, centred instructions

README.md, after:

# Retro ADS-B Radar ✈

Aircraft radar display built with Python and Pygame. Visualises real-time aircraft positions and metadata from a tar1090 server, with a retro interface.

## Features
- Real-time radar visualisation of aircraft within a configurable radius
- Military aircraft detection with configurable hex code prefixes and blinking effect
- Configurable font sizes and display settings
- Tabular display of aircraft data (callsign, altitude, speed, distance, track)
- Live ATC audio streaming from a specified URL
- Retro colour palette and font
- Default configuration is compatible with the [Hagibis Mini PC USB-C Hub](https://hagibis.com/products-p00288p1.html)

![Retro ADS-B Radar Screenshot](images/screenshot.png)

![Retro ADS-B Radar Running on Hagibis Mini PC USB-C Hub](images/hagibis_display.jpg)

## Quick Start

### Hardware Setup
- Connect your ADS-B USB dongle (e.g. RTL-SDR) to a Raspberry Pi or similar single-board computer.
- Attach a suitable 1090 MHz antenna to the dongle.
- Ensure the dongle is running software that provides ADS-B data in JSON format, such as [tar1090](https://github.com/wiedehopf/tar1090).
- Connect your Raspberry Pi to your display, such as the Hagibis Mini PC USB-C Hub, with an HDMI cable.

### Software Setup
Clone the repository:
  ```
  git clone https://github.com/nicespoon/retro-adsb-radar.git
  cd retro-adsb-radar
  ```
Create and activate a virtual environment:
```
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
```

Install dependencies:
  ```
  pip install -r requirements.txt
  ```
Make a copy of the example configuration and edit to suit your setup:

```
cp config.ini.example config.ini
nano config.ini
```
See below for configuration details.

### Run the Radar UI
After configuring `config.ini`, start the radar application:
```bash
python3 main.py
```

To quit, press `Q` or `ESC` in the radar window. If ATC audio streaming is enabled by setting a `ATC_STREAM_URL`, press `A` to toggle audio on/off.

## Configuration
The application is configured via `config.ini`.

```ini
[General]
FETCH_INTERVAL = 10                # Data fetch interval (seconds)
MIL_PREFIX_LIST = 7CF              # Comma-separated list of military aircraft hex prefixes (e.g. 7CF,AE,43C)
TAR1090_URL = http://localhost/tar1090/data/aircraft.json  # tar1090 data source URL
BLINK_MILITARY = true              # Toggle blinking effect for military aircraft (true/false)

[Audio]
ATC_STREAM_URL =                   # URL of live ATC audio stream (leave blank to disable)
AUTO_START = false                 # Start ATC stream automatically (true/false)

[Location]
LAT = -31.9522                     # Radar centre latitude
LON = 115.8614                     # Radar centre longitude
AREA_NAME = PERTH                  # Displayed area name
RADIUS_NM = 60                     # Radar range (nautical miles)

[Display]
SCREEN_WIDTH = 960                 # Window width (pixels)
SCREEN_HEIGHT = 640                # Window height (pixels)
FPS = 6                            # Frames per second
MAX_TABLE_ROWS = 10                # Maximum number of aircraft to show in the table
FONT_PATH = fonts/TerminusTTF-4.49.3.ttf  # Path to TTF font
BACKGROUND_PATH =                  # Path to background image (leave blank for black background)
TRAIL_MIN_LENGTH = 8               # Minimum length of aircraft trail
TRAIL_MAX_LENGTH = 25              # Maximum length of aircraft trail
TRAIL_MAX_SPEED = 500              # Speed (knots) at which trail reaches maximum length
HEADER_FONT_SIZE = 32              # Font size for the header text
RADAR_FONT_SIZE = 28               # Font size for radar labels and callsigns
TABLE_FONT_SIZE = 28               # Font size for the data table
INSTRUCTION_FONT_SIZE = 28         # Font size for instruction text
```

## Pygame SDL Dependency Check and Troubleshooting

Pygame relies on several SDL subsystems, including:

- Video subsystem (`libsdl2`)
- Font rendering (`libsdl2-ttf`)
- Image loading (`libsdl2-image`)

The availability of these modules is checked at startup. If dependencies are installed on your system, the output will be:

```
Checking Pygame module support...
✅ Video: Supported
✅ Font: Supported
✅ Image: Supported
```

If modules are missing, the output will look like this:

```
Checking Pygame module support...
❌ Video: Not available - install libsdl2-2.0-0
❌ Font: Not available - install libsdl2-ttf-2.0-0
❌ Image: Not available - install libsdl2-image-2.0-0
```

### How to Fix Missing Dependencies

If you see errors indicating missing dependencies, you can install the required system packages using the following command:

```
sudo apt update
sudo apt install libsdl2-2.0-0 libsdl2-ttf-2.0-0 libsdl2-image-2.0-0
```

## License
- The project code is licensed under the MIT License (see `LICENSE`).
- Fonts used in this project are licensed under the SIL Open Font License Version 1.1. See font license files in the `fonts` directory for details.
